Multiple Network Attachment with bridge CNI (#631)
kubevirt/kubevirt.github.io: _posts/2020-09-23-attaching-to-multiple-networks-followup.markdown

---
layout: post
author: ellorent

> tittle: Multiple Network Attachment with bridge CNI

Author: Done

For this blog post we are going to use the following components, also we will explain them later on:

- multus: to start a secondary interface at pods
- linux bridge CNI: to use bridge CNI and connect the secondary interfaces from pods to a linux bridge at nodes
- kubemacpool: to be able to manage mac addresses
- kubernetes-nmstate: to configure the linux bridge at the nodes

What components we want to deploy is specified by the CRD NetworkAddonsConfig and the progress of the installation appears at a status field, split per component.

To simplify this blog post we are going to use directly the NetworkAddonsConfig from HCO, it install all the network components, but just to illustrate CNAO here it is a configuration to
specify what we want to install:

```yaml
apiVersion: networkaddonsoperator.network.kubevirt.io/v1
kind: NetworkAddonsConfig
metadata:
  name: cluster
spec:
  multus: {}
  linuxBridge: {}
  nmstate: {}
  imagePullPolicy: Always
```

## Connecting Pods, VMs and Nodes over a single secondary network with bridge CNI

> Although kubernetes provides you with a default interfaces that gives connectivity to pods and VMs, it's not easy if not impossible to specify on a multi NIC node cluster which one should used for specific pods or VMs, we can think on examples like typical split of control/traffic planes isolated by different NIC at nodes.

Author: The it would be a sub-title of Introducction, it just illustrate how the multus configuration is.

> With linux bridge CNI + multus it's possible to create a secondary NIC at pods that will attach a port to a specific node L2 linux bridge (created by kubernetes-nmstate) so connecting a node secondary NIC to the linux-bridge throw a port will bring up connectivity of the pod's secondary NIC to the node specific one.

Reviewer: `to the node specific one` not sure I understood what you meant here

Author: I don't understand the whole paragraph... I will rewrite it.

To ensure that the configuration is applied only at pods on nodes that has the bridge the `k8s.v1.cni.cncf.io/resourceName` is added, this goes hand in hand with another component [bridge-marker](https://github.com/kubevirt/bridge-marker) that will inspect nodes networking and if a bridge pops up it will mark node status with it.

> This is an example of the results from bridge-marker on nodes:

Reviewer: not sure what you mean by results. can you add the command to get this?

```

This is an example of NetworkAttachmentDefinition to create a L2 bridge

```yaml
apiVersion: k8s.cni.cncf.io/v1
kind: NetworkAttachmentDefinition
metadata:
  name: bridge-network
  annotations:
    k8s.v1.cni.cncf.io/resourceName: bridge.network.kubevirt.io/br0
spec:
  config: >
    {
        "cniVersion": "0.3.1"
        "name": "br0-l2",
        "plugins": [{
            "type": "bridge",
            "bridge": "br0",
            "ipam": {}
        }]
    }
```

After this adding bridge secondary network to a pod is a matter of adding the following annotation to
it:

```yaml
annotations:
  k8s.v1.cni.cncf.io/networks: br0-l2
```

## Messing up node networking with NodeNetworkConfigurationPolicy (aka nncp)

Changing kubernetes cluster node networking can be done manually iterating over all the cluster nodes and making changes or using different automatization tools like ansible, but using just another kubernetes resource for that purpose
make it very convenient, for this the kubernetes-nmstate project was born as a cluster wide node network administrator based on kubernetes CRs in top of [nmstate](https://github.com/nmstate/nmstate).

> It works as a k8s DaemonSet running pods at all the cluster nodes and reconciling three different CRs, the [NodeNetworkConfigurationPolicy](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/nmstate/kubernetes-nmstate/master/deploy/crds/nmstate.io_v1beta1_nodenetworkconfigurationpolicy_cr.yaml) (nncp) to specify cluster node network desired configuration, [NodeNetworkConfigurationEnactment](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/nmstate/kubernetes-nmstate/master/deploy/crds/nmstate.io_v1beta1_nodenetworkconfigurationenactment_cr.yaml) (nnce) to troubleshoot issues with nncp and [NodeNetworkState](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/nmstate/kubernetes-nmstate/master/deploy/crds/nmstate.io_v1beta1_nodenetworkstate_cr.yaml) (nns) to view the node's networking configuration.

Reviewer: perhaps make it a dotted list?
```
three different CRs:
* [NodeNetworkConfigurationPolicy](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/nmstate/kubernetes-nmstate/master/deploy/crds/nmstate.io_v1beta1_nodenetworkconfigurationpolicy_cr.yaml) to specify cluster node network desired configuration
* [NodeNetworkConfigurationEnactment](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/nmstate/kubernetes-nmstate/master/deploy/crds/nmstate.io_v1beta1_nodenetworkconfigurationenactment_cr.yaml) (nnce) to troubleshoot issues with nncp
* [NodeNetworkState](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/nmstate/kubernetes-nmstate/master/deploy/crds/nmstate.io_v1beta1_nodenetworkstate_cr.yaml) (nns) to view the node's networking configuration
```

> note ""

> > The architecture of kubernetes-nmstate is fully distributed to reduce the kube-apiserver connectivity dependency since playing around with node networking can break that, this means that every pod will configure the networking on the node that it's running without much interaction with kube-apiserver.

Author: reworded

In case something goes wrong and the pod changing the node network cannot ping the default gw or has lost the kube-apiserver connectivity it will rollback to the previous configuration to go back to a working state. Those errors can be checked with the command `kubectl get nnce` it will show issue per node and nncp.

> note ""

> > There is already an issue related to clusters not having a default gw making the nncp always to rollback, there are plans to use different approach like checking name servers.

Reviewer: `There is already an issue`-->`There is a known issue` + maybe attach a link to the issue, if a BZ exist?

> What can be and what cannot be on a nncp desired state field depends on nmstate and it can be checked out at their [awesome doc|https://www.nmstate.io/]

Reviewer: wrong link syntax `[awesome doc|https://www.nmstate.io/]` -->`[awesome doc](https://www.nmstate.io/)`

            enabled: false
        port:
        - name: eth1
EOF
```

Now we wait for the bridge to be created checking nncp conditions

```bash
kubectl wait nncp br0-eth1 --for condition=Available --timeout 2m
```

After that if we query the nncp at the cluster we should get that we
have one and status is ok.

```bash
$kubectl get nncp
NAME       STATUS
br0-eth1   SuccessfullyConfigured
```

In case that our cluster has multiple nodes we can inspect the status applying the policy
to each node for that we have the NodeNetworkConfigurationEnactment or nnce

```bash
$kubectl get nnce
NAME              STATUS
node01.br0-eth1   SuccessfullyConfigured
node02.br0-eth1   SuccessfullyConfigured
```

> note ""
> In case of errors is possible to retrieve the error dumped by nmstate running
> `kubectl get nnce -o yaml` the status will print the error.

We can also inspect the network state at the nodes retrieving the NodeNetworkState and
check if the bridge `br0` is up using jsonpath

```bash
kubectl get nns node01 -o=jsonpath='{.status.currentState.interfaces[?(@.name=="br0")].state}'
kubectl get nns node02 -o=jsonpath='{.status.currentState.interfaces[?(@.name=="br0")].state}'
```

> Also inspecting the full currentState yaml we will get the following

Reviewer 2: When inspecting the full... we get the following...

interface configuration:

```bash
kubectl get nns node01 -o yaml
status:
  currentState:
    interfaces:
      - bridge:
          options:
            group-forward-mask: 0
            mac-ageing-time: 300
            multicast-snooping: true
            stp:
              enabled: false
              forward-delay: 15
              hello-time: 2
              max-age: 20
              priority: 32768
          port:
            - name: eth1
              stp-hairpin-mode: false
              stp-path-cost: 100
              stp-priority: 32
        description: Linux bridge with eth1 as a port
        ipv4:
          dhcp: false
          enabled: false
        ipv6:
          autoconf: false
          dhcp: false
          enabled: false
        mac-address: 52:55:00:D1:56:00
        mtu: 1500
        name: br0
        state: up
        type: linux-bridge
```

We can also check that the `bridge-marker` is working and check resources at nodes

```
kubectl get node node01 -o yaml
```

and under status something like the following should appear stating that br0

> can be consumed at the node

Reviewer 2: on the node

```yaml
status:
  allocatable:
    bridge.network.kubevirt.io/br0: 1k
  capacity:
    bridge.network.kubevirt.io/br0: 1k
```

At this point we have ready L2 linux bridge connected to NIC eth1

## Configure multus attachment with a L2 bridge and a vlan

It needs to specify the br0 as the port no ipam to make it L2 bridge and
the vlan we want to use to isolate our VMs

```bash
cat <<EOF | kubectl apply -f -
apiVersion: k8s.cni.cncf.io/v1
kind: NetworkAttachmentDefinition
metadata:
  name: br0-100-l2
  annotations:
    k8s.v1.cni.cncf.io/resourceName: bridge.network.kubevirt.io/br0
spec:
  config: >
    {
        "cniVersion": "0.3.1",
        "name": "br0-100-l2-conf",
        "plugins": [{
            "type": "bridge",
            "bridge": "br0",
            "vlan": 100,
            "ipam": {}}]
    }
EOF
```

## Start a pair of VMI at different nodes using the multus configuration to connect a secondary interfaces to br0

> Now it's time for startup the VMIs they will run at different nodes so we can check external connectivity of

Reviewer 2: Now it's the time to startup the VMIs running on different nodes

br0, they will also have a secondary NIC eth1 to connect to the other VM running at different node, so they go
over the br0 at nodes.

> First step is to install the `virtcl` command line tool to play with virtual machines:

Reviewer 2: virtctl

```bash
curl -L -o virtctl https://github.com/kubevirt/kubevirt/releases/download/v0.33.0/virtctl-v0.33.0-linux-amd64
chmod +x virtctl
sudo install virtctl /usr/local/bin
```

> Now let's create two VirtualMachineInstance at each node they will have one secondary NIC connected to br0 using the multus configuration for vlan 100.

Reviewer 2: `VirtualMachineInstance`s on easch node

        bridge: {}
      - name: br0-100
        bridge: {}
    resources:
      requests:
        memory: 64M
  networks:
  - name: default
    pod: {}
  - name: br0-100
    multus:
      networkName: br0-100-l2
  volumes:
    - name: containerdisk
      containerDisk:
        image: kubevirt/cirros-registry-disk-demo
    - name: cloudinitdisk
      cloudInitNoCloud:
        userDataBase64: SGkuXG4=
---
apiVersion: kubevirt.io/v1alpha3
kind: VirtualMachineInstance
metadata:
  name: vmib
spec:
  nodeSelector:
    kubernetes.io/hostname: node02
  domain:
    devices:
      disks:
        - name: containerdisk
          disk:
            bus: virtio
        - name: cloudinitdisk
          disk:
            bus: virtio
      interfaces:
      - name: default
        bridge: {}
      - name: br0-100
        bridge: {}
    resources:
      requests:
        memory: 64M
  networks:
  - name: default
    pod: {}
  - name: br0-100
    multus:
      networkName: br0-100-l2
  volumes:
    - name: containerdisk
      containerDisk:
        image: kubevirt/cirros-registry-disk-demo
    - name: cloudinitdisk
      cloudInitNoCloud:
        userDataBase64: SGkuXG4=
EOF
```

> Wait for the two VMIs to be ready at the end

Reviewer 2: at the end -> eventually

you will get something like this

```bash
$ kubectl get vmi
NAME      AGE    PHASE     IP               NODENAME
vmia   2m4s   Running   10.244.196.142   node01
vmib   2m4s   Running   10.244.140.86    node02
```

We can check that they have one secondary NIC without
address assigned

```bash
$ kubectl get vmi -o yaml
## vmia
    interfaces:
    - ipAddress: 10.244.196.142
      ipAddresses:
      - 10.244.196.142
      - fd10:244::c48d
      mac: f2:be:af:da:86:29
      name: default
    - mac: b6:b5:dc:21:8c:84
      name: br0-100
## vmib
    interfaces:
    - ipAddress: 10.244.140.86
      ipAddresses:
      - 10.244.140.86
      - fd10:244::8c55
      mac: 9e:9c:77:e4:d7:4d
      name: default
    - mac: e6:26:b7:33:c4:ee
      name: br0-100
```

Now we start up those interfaces assign ip addresses and add routes to them.

For vmia we will use .1 network:

```bash
virtctl console vmia
sudo ip a add 10.200.0.1 dev eth1
sudo ip l set up dev eth1
sudo ip route add 10.200.0.0/24 dev eth1
```

And for vmib we will use .2 network:

```bash
virtctl console vmib
sudo ip a add 10.200.0.2 dev eth1
sudo ip l set up dev eth1
sudo ip route add 10.200.0.0/24 dev eth1
```

> And to finis this we use `ping` command to check that vmia and vmib communication is working fine using 10.200.0.2 as

Reviewer 2: finish

    - multus
    - bridge-cni
    - kubemacpool
    - kubernetes-nmstate
  - KubeVirt

## Introducing cluster-network-addons-operator

The [cluster network addons operator](https://github.com/kubevirt/cluster-network-addons-operator) manages the lifecycle (deploy/update/delete) of different k8s network components needed to
configure secondary interfaces, manages MAC addresses and defines networking at host for pods and VMs.

Good thing about having an operator is that everything is done through the API and you don't have to go over all nodes to install these components yourself and assures smooth updates.

In this blog post we are going to use the following components, explained in a greater detail later on:

- multus: to start a secondary interface on containers in pods
- linux bridge CNI: to use bridge CNI and connect the secondary interfaces from pods to a linux bridge at nodes
- kubemacpool: to manage mac addresses
- kubernetes-nmstate: to configure the linux bridge on the nodes

The list of components we want CNAO to deploy is specified by the NetworkAddonsConfig CR and the progress of the installation appears in the CR status field, split per component. To inspect

> this progress we can query the CR status with the following command

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
this progress we can query the CR status with the following command:
```

```bash
kubectl get NetworkAddonsConfig cluster -o yaml
```

To simplify this blog post we are going to use directly the NetworkAddonsConfig from HCO, which by default installs all the network components, but just to illustrate CNAO configuration, the following is a NetworkAddonsConfig CR instructing to deploy multus, linuxBridge, nmstate and kubemacpool components:

```yaml
apiVersion: networkaddonsoperator.network.kubevirt.io/v1
kind: NetworkAddonsConfig
metadata:
  name: cluster
spec:
  multus: {}
  linuxBridge: {}
  nmstate: {}
  imagePullPolicy: Always
```

## Connecting Pods, VMs and Nodes over a single secondary network with bridge CNI

> Although kubernetes provides you with a default interfaces that gives connectivity to pods and VMs, it's not easy if not impossible to specify on a multi NIC node cluster which one should be used for specific pods or VMs. Typical example use case is to split control/traffic planes isolated by different NICs at nodes.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Although kubernetes provides a default interface that gives connectivity to pods and VMs, it's not easy, if not impossible, to configure which NIC should be used for specific pods or VMs in a multi NIC node cluster. Typical use case is to split control/traffic planes isolated by different NICs on nodes.
```

> Although kubernetes provides you with a default interfaces that gives connectivity to pods and VMs, it's not easy if not impossible to specify on a multi NIC node cluster which one should be used for specific pods or VMs. Typical example use case is to split control/traffic planes isolated by different NICs at nodes.

Reviewer 3: 'a default interface', singular.

> Although kubernetes provides you with a default interfaces that gives connectivity to pods and VMs, it's not easy if not impossible to specify on a multi NIC node cluster which one should be used for specific pods or VMs. Typical example use case is to split control/traffic planes isolated by different NICs at nodes.

Reviewer 3: I would outright remove the 'if not impossible' part, it only confuses the reader.

With linux bridge CNI + multus it's possible to create a secondary NIC in pods containers and attach it to a L2 linux bridge at nodes. This will add container's connectivity to a specific NIC at nodes if that NIC is part of the L2 linux bridge.

> To ensure that the configuration is applied only in pods on nodes that have the bridge the `k8s.v1.cni.cncf.io/resourceName` is added, this goes hand in hand with another component [bridge-marker](https://github.com/kubevirt/bridge-marker) that will inspect nodes networking and if a new bridge pops up it will mark node status with it.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To ensure the configuration is applied only in pods on nodes that have the bridge, the `k8s.v1.cni.cncf.io/resourceName` label is added. This goes hand in hand with another component, [bridge-marker](https://github.com/kubevirt/bridge-marker) which inspects nodes networking and if a new bridge pops up it will mark the node status with it.
```

This is an example of the results from bridge-marker on nodes:

```yaml
---
status:
  allocatable:
    bridge.network.kubevirt.io/testBridge: 1k
  capacity:

>     bridge.network.kubevirt.io/testBridge: 1k

Reviewer 3: I'd have this match the `resourceName` requested below - br0 .

```

This is an example of NetworkAttachmentDefinition to create a L2 bridge

```yaml
apiVersion: k8s.cni.cncf.io/v1
kind: NetworkAttachmentDefinition
metadata:
  name: bridge-network
  annotations:
    k8s.v1.cni.cncf.io/resourceName: bridge.network.kubevirt.io/br0
spec:
  config: >
    {
        "cniVersion": "0.3.1"
        "name": "br0-l2",
        "plugins": [{
            "type": "bridge",
            "bridge": "br0",
            "ipam": {}
        }]
    }
```

Then adding bridge secondary network to a pod is a matter of adding the following annotation to
it:

```yaml
annotations:
  k8s.v1.cni.cncf.io/networks: br0-l2
```

> ## Messing up node networking with NodeNetworkConfigurationPolicy (aka nncp)

Reviewer 3: I'd replace the 'messing up' part w/ 'setting up' / 'configuring'. Who would want to 'mess up their networking' ?

> Changing kubernetes cluster node networking can be done manually iterating over all the cluster nodes and making changes or using different automatization tools like ansible, but using just another kubernetes resource for that purpose

Reviewer 2: Just an idea. Up to you to consider, relates to the following line
```suggestion
Changing kubernetes cluster node networking can be done manually iterating over all the cluster nodes and making changes or using different automatization tools like ansible, but using just another kubernetes resource is more convenient.
```

> make it very convenient, for this the kubernetes-nmstate project was born as a cluster wide node network administrator based on kubernetes CRs on top of [nmstate](https://github.com/nmstate/nmstate).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For this purpose the kubernetes-nmstate project was born as a cluster wide node network administrator based on kubernetes CRs on top of [nmstate](https://github.com/nmstate/nmstate).
```

> It works as a k8s DaemonSet running pods at all the cluster nodes and reconciling three different CRs:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It works as a k8s DaemonSet running pods on all the cluster nodes and reconciling three different CRs:
```

- [NodeNetworkConfigurationPolicy](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/nmstate/kubernetes-nmstate/master/deploy/crds/nmstate.io_v1beta1_nodenetworkconfigurationpolicy_cr.yaml) to specify cluster node network desired configuration
- [NodeNetworkConfigurationEnactment](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/nmstate/kubernetes-nmstate/master/deploy/crds/nmstate.io_v1beta1_nodenetworkconfigurationenactment_cr.yaml) (nnce) to troubleshoot issues with nncp
- [NodeNetworkState](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/nmstate/kubernetes-nmstate/master/deploy/crds/nmstate.io_v1beta1_nodenetworkstate_cr.yaml) (nns) to view the node's networking configuration

> > note "Note"

Reviewer 4: The notes still looks weird. https://github.com/kubevirt/kubevirt.github.io/blob/592b924cfec39241bafbb24d883a33839172cf91/_posts/2020-09-23-attaching-to-multiple-networks-followup.markdown

I think something like that will work:
```
> **Note:** 
> Project kubernetes-nmstate has a distributed architecture to reduce kube-apiserver connectivity dependency, this means that every pod will configure the networking on the node that it's running without much interaction with kube-apiserver.
```

Author: They look fine at preview version https://deploy-preview-631--kubevirtio.netlify.app/2020/attaching-to-multiple-networks-followup.html

Reviewer 4: oh great!

> Project kubernetes-nmstate has a distributed architecture to reduce kube-apiserver connectivity dependency, this means that every pod will configure the networking on the node that it's running without much interaction with kube-apiserver.

> In case something goes wrong and the pod changing the node network cannot ping the default gateway or has lost the kube-apiserver connectivity it will rollback to the previous configuration to go back to a working state. Those errors can be checked with the command `kubectl get nnce` it will show issue per node and nncp.

Reviewer 2: Just an idea, if you don't like this change, I would only suggest to split the sentences

```suggestion
In case something goes wrong and the pod changing the node network cannot ping the default gateway or has lost the kube-apiserver connectivity it will rollback to the previous configuration to go back to a working state. Those errors can be checked by running `kubectl get nnce`. The command displays potential issue per node and nncp.
```

> note "Note"
> There is a known issue related to clusters not having a default gateway making the nncp always to rollback, there are plans to use different approach like checking name servers.

> What can be and what cannot be in a nncp desired state field depends on nmstate and it can be checked out at their [awesome doc](https://www.nmstate.io/)

Reviewer 3: This line does not read well; "The desired state field follow the nmstate API described @ ... " ?

> Also for more details on kubernetes-nmstate there are guides covering [reporting](https://github.com/nmstate/kubernetes-nmstate/blob/master/docs/user-guide-101-reporting.md), [configuration](https://github.com/nmstate/kubernetes-nmstate/blob/master/docs/user-guide-102-configuration.md) and [troubleshoot](https://github.com/nmstate/kubernetes-nmstate/blob/master/docs/user-guide-103-troubleshooting.md), also some [nncp examples](https://github.com/nmstate/kubernetes-nmstate/tree/master/docs/examples).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Also for more details on kubernetes-nmstate there are guides covering [reporting](https://github.com/nmstate/kubernetes-nmstate/blob/master/docs/user-guide-101-reporting.md), [configuration](https://github.com/nmstate/kubernetes-nmstate/blob/master/docs/user-guide-102-configuration.md) and [troubleshooting](https://github.com/nmstate/kubernetes-nmstate/blob/master/docs/user-guide-103-troubleshooting.md). There are also [nncp examples](https://github.com/nmstate/kubernetes-nmstate/tree/master/docs/examples).
```

> # Mixing it all together, fine grain VM to external world communication

Reviewer 3: I don't get the 'fine grain' part. What do you intended with that ?

Author: Removing it.

> With the following recipe we will end up with a pair virtual machines on two different nodes with three secondary NIC, eth1 no vlan, eth2 vlan 100 and eth3 vlan 200, they will be connected to each other using

Reviewer: `with a pair virtual machines` --> `with a pair of virtual machines`

> With the following recipe we will end up with a pair virtual machines on two different nodes with three secondary NIC, eth1 no vlan, eth2 vlan 100 and eth3 vlan 200, they will be connected to each other using

Reviewer: `three secondary NIC,`-->`three secondary NICs,`

> With the following recipe we will end up with a pair virtual machines on two different nodes with three secondary NIC, eth1 no vlan, eth2 vlan 100 and eth3 vlan 200, they will be connected to each other using

Reviewer: `200, they will`-->`200. They will`

> With the following recipe we will end up with a pair virtual machines on two different nodes with three secondary NIC, eth1 no vlan, eth2 vlan 100 and eth3 vlan 200, they will be connected to each other using

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
With the following recipe we will end up with a pair of virtual machines on two different nodes with three secondary NICs, eth1 no vlan, eth2 vlan 100 and eth3 vlan 200, they will be connected to each other using
```

> With the following recipe we will end up with a virtual machines pair on two different nodes with three secondary NICs, eth1 no vlan, eth2 vlan 100 and eth3 vlan 200. They will be connected to each other using

Reviewer 3: I'd have a short list instead, something like:
```
In this section we will show the configuration to achieve our goal, which is to have one VM in each node, whose config is:
  - eth1; no vlan
  - eth2; vlan 100
  - eth3; vlan 200

...
```

Author: This is old at the end I just configured one secondary nic to communicate will reworkd this.

> the same bridge at nodes that also has the external secondary NIC eth1 connected.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
the same bridge on nodes that also have the external secondary NIC eth1 connected.
```

## Requirements

> We are going to use a [kubevirtci](https://github.com/kubevirt/kubevirtci) as kubernetes ephemeral cluster provider

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We are going to use a [kubevirtci](https://github.com/kubevirt/kubevirtci) as kubernetes ephemeral cluster provider.
```

> To start it up with two nodes and one secondary NIC and install NetworkManager >= 1.22 (needed for kubernetes-nmstate) and dnsmasq follow the following steps:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To start it up with two nodes and one secondary NIC and install NetworkManager >= 1.22 (needed for kubernetes-nmstate) and dnsmasq follow these steps:
```

needed to have a functional kubevirt with all the features including the ones we are going to use: multus, linux-bridge, kubemacpool and kubernetes-nmstate.

```bash
curl https://raw.githubusercontent.com/kubevirt/hyperconverged-cluster-operator/master/deploy/deploy.sh | bash
kubectl wait hco -n kubevirt-hyperconverged kubevirt-hyperconverged --for condition=Available --timeout=500s
```

Now we have a kubernetes cluster with all the pieces to startup a VM with bridge attached to a secondary NIC.

## Creating the br0 on nodes with a port attached to secondary NIC eth1

First step is to create a L2 linux-bridge at nodes with one port on the secondary NIC eth1, this will be
used later on by the bridge CNI.

```bash
cat <<EOF | kubectl apply -f -
apiVersion: nmstate.io/v1alpha1
kind: NodeNetworkConfigurationPolicy
metadata:
  name: br0-eth1
spec:
  desiredState:
    interfaces:
    - name: br0
      description: Linux bridge with eth1 as a port
      type: linux-bridge
      state: up
      ipv4:
        dhcp: false
        enabled: false
      bridge:
        options:
          stp:
            enabled: false
        port:
        - name: eth1
EOF
```

> Now we wait for the bridge to be created checking nncp conditions

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Now we wait for the bridge to be created checking nncp conditions:
```

```bash
kubectl wait nncp br0-eth1 --for condition=Available --timeout 2m
```

> After that if we query the nncp in the cluster we should get that we

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
After the nncp becomes available, we can query the nncp resources in the cluster
```

> have one and status is ok.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
and see it listed with successful status.
```

```bash
$kubectl get nncp
NAME       STATUS
br0-eth1   SuccessfullyConfigured
```

> In case that our cluster has multiple nodes we can inspect the status applying the policy

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We can inspect the status of applying the policy to each node.
```

> to each node for that we have the NodeNetworkConfigurationEnactment or nnce

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For that there is the NodeNetworkConfigurationEnactment CR (nnce):
```

```bash
$kubectl get nnce
NAME              STATUS
node01.br0-eth1   SuccessfullyConfigured
node02.br0-eth1   SuccessfullyConfigured
```

> note "Note"

> > In case of errors is possible to retrieve the error dumped by nmstate running

Reviewer: `In case of errors is possible to retrieve`-->`In case of errors it is possible to retrieve`

> > `kubectl get nnce -o yaml` the status will print the error.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> `kubectl get nnce -o yaml` the status will contain the error.
```

> We can also inspect the network state on the nodes retrieving the NodeNetworkState and

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We can also inspect the network state on the nodes by retrieving the NodeNetworkState and
```

> check if the bridge `br0` is up using jsonpath

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
checking if the bridge `br0` is up using jsonpath
```

```bash
kubectl get nns node01 -o=jsonpath='{.status.currentState.interfaces[?(@.name=="br0")].state}'
kubectl get nns node02 -o=jsonpath='{.status.currentState.interfaces[?(@.name=="br0")].state}'
```

When inspecting the full currentState yaml we get the following
interface configuration:

```bash
kubectl get nns node01 -o yaml
status:
  currentState:
    interfaces:
      - bridge:
          options:
            group-forward-mask: 0
            mac-ageing-time: 300
            multicast-snooping: true
            stp:
              enabled: false
              forward-delay: 15
              hello-time: 2
              max-age: 20
              priority: 32768
          port:
            - name: eth1
              stp-hairpin-mode: false
              stp-path-cost: 100
              stp-priority: 32
        description: Linux bridge with eth1 as a port
        ipv4:
          dhcp: false
          enabled: false
        ipv6:
          autoconf: false
          dhcp: false
          enabled: false
        mac-address: 52:55:00:D1:56:00
        mtu: 1500
        name: br0
        state: up
        type: linux-bridge
```

> We can also check that the `bridge-marker` is working and check resources on nodes

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We can also check that the `bridge-marker` is working and check resources on nodes:
```

> We can also check that the `bridge-marker` is working and check resources at nodes

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We can also check that the `bridge-marker` is working and check resources on nodes
```

```
kubectl get node node01 -o yaml
```

> and under status something like the following should appear stating that br0

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The following should appear stating that br0
```

> can be consumed on the node

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
can be consumed on the node:
```

```yaml
status:
  allocatable:
    bridge.network.kubevirt.io/br0: 1k
  capacity:
    bridge.network.kubevirt.io/br0: 1k
```

> At this point we have ready L2 linux bridge connected to NIC eth1

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
At this point we have ready L2 linux bridge connected to NIC eth1.
```

## Configure multus attachment with a L2 bridge and a vlan

> It needs to specify the br0 as the port no ipam to make it L2 bridge and

Reviewer: not sure what is `It` here.
I would reword to something like "In order to make the bridge a L2 bridge with vlan, we ..."

> It needs to specify the br0 as the port no ipam to make it L2 bridge and

Reviewer 2: I would suggest starting this section with some introductory sentence, like: To achieve `this` and `that` with the linux bridge, we create a net-attach-def. The net-attach-def needs to specify ....

the vlan we want to use to isolate our VMs

```bash
cat <<EOF | kubectl apply -f -
apiVersion: k8s.cni.cncf.io/v1
kind: NetworkAttachmentDefinition
metadata:
  name: br0-100-l2
  annotations:
    k8s.v1.cni.cncf.io/resourceName: bridge.network.kubevirt.io/br0
spec:
  config: >
    {
        "cniVersion": "0.3.1",
        "name": "br0-100-l2-conf",
        "plugins": [{
            "type": "bridge",
            "bridge": "br0",
            "vlan": 100,
            "ipam": {}}]
    }
EOF
```

> ## Start a pair of VMI at different nodes using the multus configuration to connect a secondary interfaces to br0

Reviewer: ` VMI at different `-->` VMI on different `

> Now it's the time to startup the VMIs running on different nodes so we can check external connectivity of

Reviewer: `Now it's the time to`-->`Now it's time to`

> br0, they will also have a secondary NIC eth1 to connect to the other VM running at different node, so they go

Reviewer: `, they will also` break to new sentence `.  They will also`

        bridge: {}
      - name: br0-100
        bridge: {}
    resources:
      requests:
        memory: 64M
  networks:
  - name: default
    pod: {}
  - name: br0-100
    multus:
      networkName: br0-100-l2
  volumes:
    - name: containerdisk
      containerDisk:
        image: kubevirt/cirros-registry-disk-demo
    - name: cloudinitdisk
      cloudInitNoCloud:
        userDataBase64: SGkuXG4=
---
apiVersion: kubevirt.io/v1alpha3
kind: VirtualMachineInstance
metadata:
  name: vmib
spec:
  nodeSelector:
    kubernetes.io/hostname: node02
  domain:
    devices:
      disks:
        - name: containerdisk
          disk:
            bus: virtio
        - name: cloudinitdisk
          disk:
            bus: virtio
      interfaces:
      - name: default
        bridge: {}
      - name: br0-100
        bridge: {}
    resources:
      requests:
        memory: 64M
  networks:
  - name: default
    pod: {}
  - name: br0-100
    multus:
      networkName: br0-100-l2
  volumes:
    - name: containerdisk
      containerDisk:
        image: kubevirt/cirros-registry-disk-demo
    - name: cloudinitdisk
      cloudInitNoCloud:
        userDataBase64: SGkuXG4=
EOF
```

> Wait for the two VMIs to be ready eventually

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Wait for the two VMIs to be ready.
```

> you will get something like this:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Eventually you will see something like this:
```

> you will get something like this

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
you will get something like this:
```

```bash
$ kubectl get vmi
NAME      AGE    PHASE     IP               NODENAME
vmia   2m4s   Running   10.244.196.142   node01
vmib   2m4s   Running   10.244.140.86    node02
```

We can check that they have one secondary NIC without

> address assigned

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
address assigned:
```

```bash
$ kubectl get vmi -o yaml
## vmia
    interfaces:
    - ipAddress: 10.244.196.142
      ipAddresses:
      - 10.244.196.142
      - fd10:244::c48d
      mac: f2:be:af:da:86:29
      name: default
    - mac: b6:b5:dc:21:8c:84
      name: br0-100
## vmib
    interfaces:
    - ipAddress: 10.244.140.86
      ipAddresses:
      - 10.244.140.86
      - fd10:244::8c55
      mac: 9e:9c:77:e4:d7:4d
      name: default
    - mac: e6:26:b7:33:c4:ee
      name: br0-100
```

> Now we to start up those interfaces assign ip addresses and add routes to them.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In the next step we assign them with ip addresses, set them up and configure routing rules.
```

> Now we start up those interfaces assign ip addresses and add routes to them.

Reviewer: `Now we start up those`-->`Now to start up those`

The [cluster network addons operator](https://github.com/kubevirt/cluster-network-addons-operator) manages the lifecycle (deploy/update/delete) of different k8s network components needed to
configure secondary interfaces, manages MAC addresses and defines networking on hosts for pods and VMs.

Good thing about having an operator is that everything is done through the API and you don't have to go over all nodes to install these components yourself and assures smooth updates.

In this blog post we are going to use the following components, explained in a greater detail later on:

- multus: to start a secondary interface on containers in pods
- linux bridge CNI: to use bridge CNI and connect the secondary interfaces from pods to a linux bridge at nodes
- kubemacpool: to manage mac addresses
- kubernetes-nmstate: to configure the linux bridge on the nodes

The list of components we want CNAO to deploy is specified by the NetworkAddonsConfig CR and the progress of the installation appears in the CR status field, split per component. To inspect
this progress we can query the CR status with the following command:

```bash
kubectl get NetworkAddonsConfig cluster -o yaml
```

> To simplify this blog post we are going to use directly the NetworkAddonsConfig from HCO, which by default installs all the network components, but just to illustrate CNAO configuration, the following is a NetworkAddonsConfig CR instructing to deploy multus, linuxBridge, nmstate and kubemacpool components:

Reviewer 3: You're only mentioning kubemacpool here, and not referring to it in any example below. What's the point ?... Since it's not used for anything, omit it.

And the 'following' is not a "NetworkAddonsConfig CR instructing to deploy multus, linuxBridge, nmstate and kubemacpool components". Kubemacpool is not there.

Reviewer 2: it's for marketing purposes :D https://github.com/kubevirt/kubevirt.github.io/pull/631#discussion_r497302759

Author: Now the `default` namespace has the opt-in for kubemacpool so VMIs use it, I also add some description before the VMIs manifests.

```yaml
apiVersion: networkaddonsoperator.network.kubevirt.io/v1
kind: NetworkAddonsConfig
metadata:
  name: cluster
spec:
  multus: {}
  linuxBridge: {}
  nmstate: {}
  imagePullPolicy: Always
```

## Connecting Pods, VMs and Nodes over a single secondary network with bridge CNI

> Although kubernetes provides a default interface that gives connectivity to pods and VMs, it's not easy, to configure which NIC should be used for specific pods or VMs in a multi NIC node cluster. Typical use case is to split control/traffic planes isolated by different NICs on nodes.

Reviewer: `it's not easy, to`--> drop the `,` `it's not easy to`

          dhcp: false
          enabled: false
        mac-address: 52:55:00:D1:56:00
        mtu: 1500
        name: br0
        state: up
        type: linux-bridge
```

We can also check that the `bridge-marker` is working and check resources on nodes:

```
kubectl get node node01 -o yaml
```

The following should appear stating that br0
can be consumed on the node:

```yaml
status:
  allocatable:
    bridge.network.kubevirt.io/br0: 1k
  capacity:
    bridge.network.kubevirt.io/br0: 1k
```

At this point we have ready L2 linux bridge connected to NIC eth1.

## Configure multus attachment with a L2 bridge and a vlan

In order to make the bridge a L2 bridge with vlan, we specify no ipam and
the vlan we want to use to isolate our VMs:

```bash
cat <<EOF | kubectl apply -f -
apiVersion: k8s.cni.cncf.io/v1
kind: NetworkAttachmentDefinition
metadata:
  name: br0-100-l2
  annotations:
    k8s.v1.cni.cncf.io/resourceName: bridge.network.kubevirt.io/br0
spec:
  config: >
    {
        "cniVersion": "0.3.1",
        "name": "br0-100-l2-config",
        "plugins": [{
            "type": "bridge",
            "bridge": "br0",
            "vlan": 100,
            "ipam": {}}]
    }
EOF
```

> ## Start a pair of VMI on different nodes using the multus configuration to connect a secondary interfaces to br0

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Start a pair of VMIs on different nodes using the multus configuration to connect a secondary interfaces to br0
```

Now it's time to startup the VMIs running on different nodes so we can check external connectivity of
br0. They will also have a secondary NIC eth1 to connect to the other VM running at different node, so they go

> over the br0 at nodes.

Reviewer: suggestion, maybe add box chart showing the components and how they are connected? 
should be 2 nodes, each having a vm, connected to the node bridge br0 via net1?

Author: Will try it.

Author: Added a graphviz diagram.

  domain:
    devices:
      disks:
        - name: containerdisk
          disk:
            bus: virtio
        - name: cloudinitdisk
          disk:
            bus: virtio
      interfaces:
      - name: default
        bridge: {}
      - name: br0-100
        bridge: {}
    machine:
      type: ""
    resources:
      requests:
        memory: 1024M
  networks:
  - name: default
    pod: {}
  - name: br0-100
    multus:
      networkName: br0-100-l2
  terminationGracePeriodSeconds: 0
  volumes:
    - name: containerdisk
      containerDisk:
        image: kubevirt/fedora-cloud-container-disk-demo
    - name: cloudinitdisk
      cloudInitNoCloud:
        networkData: |
          version: 2
          ethernets:
            eth1:
              addresses: [ 10.200.0.2/24 ]
        userData: |-
          #cloud-config
          password: fedora
          chpasswd: { expire: False }
EOF
```

Wait for the two VMIs to be ready.
Eventually you will see something like this:

```bash
$ kubectl get vmi
NAME      AGE    PHASE     IP               NODENAME
vmia      2m4s   Running   10.244.196.142   node01
vmib      2m4s   Running   10.244.140.86    node02
```

> We can check that they have one secondary NIC without

Reviewer 2: Are the IP addresses not showing up because there isn't guest agent installed?
If so, it may be worth adding a note explaining this

Author: Yep that's it, I will add a note.

Reviewer 3: I think @rhrazdil is right:  the lack of IP addresses comes from the missing guest agent (all binding types - except masquerade rely on the guest-agent iirc).

I also agree that since you mention the IP is missing, you might as well write why. I think it is also OK to just omit the entire  paragraph.

Author: Added some steps to install the guest aggent

address assigned:

```bash
$ kubectl get vmi -o yaml
## vmia
    interfaces:
    - ipAddress: 10.244.196.142
      ipAddresses:
      - 10.244.196.142
      - fd10:244::c48d
      mac: f2:be:af:da:86:29
      name: default
    - mac: b6:b5:dc:21:8c:84
      name: br0-100
## vmib
    interfaces:
    - ipAddress: 10.244.140.86
      ipAddresses:
      - 10.244.140.86
      - fd10:244::8c55
      mac: 9e:9c:77:e4:d7:4d
      name: default
    - mac: e6:26:b7:33:c4:ee
      name: br0-100
```

> And to finish this we use `ping` command to check that vmia and vmib communication is working fine using 10.200.0.2 as

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Let's finish this section by verifying connectivity between vmia and vmib using `ping`. Open the console of vmia virtual machine and use `ping` command with destination IP address 10.200.0.2, which is the address assigned to the secondary interface of vmib:
```

> destination since is the address that vmib has at its eth1 interface:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

> note "Note"
> The user and password for this VMIs is `fedora`, it was configured at cloudinit userData

```bash
virtctl console vmia
$ ping 10.200.0.2 -c 3
PING 10.200.0.2 (10.200.0.2): 56 data bytes
64 bytes from 10.200.0.2: seq=0 ttl=50 time=357.040 ms
64 bytes from 10.200.0.2: seq=1 ttl=50 time=379.742 ms
64 bytes from 10.200.0.2: seq=2 ttl=50 time=404.066 ms

--- 10.200.0.2 ping statistics ---
3 packets transmitted, 3 packets received, 0% packet loss
round-trip min/avg/max = 357.040/380.282/404.066 ms

> ```

Reviewer 2: It may be nice to add a Conclusion section, where you could summarize what we used, what we achieved and what is it good ofr

---
layout: post
author: ellorent
title: Multiple Network Attachments with bridge CNI
description: This post illustrate configuring secondary interfaces at VMs with a L2 linux bridge at nodes using just kube api.
navbar_active: Blogs
pub-date: September 23
pub-year: 2020

> category: news

Reviewer 5: This is not really news, is it?

In case something goes wrong and the pod changing the node network cannot ping the default gateway or has lost the kube-apiserver connectivity it will rollback to the previous configuration to go back to a working state. Those errors can be checked by running `kubectl get nnce`. The command displays potential issue per node and nncp.

> note "Note"
> There is a known issue related to clusters not having a default gateway making the nncp always to rollback, there are plans to use different approach like checking name servers.

The desired state field follow the nmstate API described at their [awesome doc](https://www.nmstate.io/)

Also for more details on kubernetes-nmstate there are guides covering [reporting](https://github.com/nmstate/kubernetes-nmstate/blob/master/docs/user-guide-101-reporting.md), [configuration](https://github.com/nmstate/kubernetes-nmstate/blob/master/docs/user-guide-102-configuration.md) and [troubleshooting](https://github.com/nmstate/kubernetes-nmstate/blob/master/docs/user-guide-103-troubleshooting.md). There are also [nncp examples](https://github.com/nmstate/kubernetes-nmstate/tree/master/docs/examples).

> # Mixing it all together, VMI to VMI communication between nodes

Reviewer 5: We should start on second level header to match the format used above, no? If we make it level 1, it looks like the header of the whole blogpost (and takes way too much space)

Reviewer 5: Also, would you prefix it with "Demo:" maybe? So it is clear that from now on, it is all for copy pasting.

kubectl wait hco -n kubevirt-hyperconverged kubevirt-hyperconverged --for condition=Available --timeout=500s
```

Now we have a kubernetes cluster with all the pieces to startup a VM with bridge attached to a secondary NIC.

## Creating the br0 on nodes with a port attached to secondary NIC eth1

First step is to create a L2 linux-bridge at nodes with one port on the secondary NIC eth1, this will be
used later on by the bridge CNI.

```bash
cat <<EOF | kubectl apply -f -
apiVersion: nmstate.io/v1alpha1
kind: NodeNetworkConfigurationPolicy
metadata:
  name: br0-eth1
spec:
  desiredState:
    interfaces:
    - name: br0
      description: Linux bridge with eth1 as a port
      type: linux-bridge
      state: up
      ipv4:
        dhcp: false
        enabled: false
      bridge:
        options:
          stp:
            enabled: false
        port:
        - name: eth1
EOF
```

Now we wait for the bridge to be created checking nncp conditions:

```bash
kubectl wait nncp br0-eth1 --for condition=Available --timeout 2m
```

After the nncp becomes available, we can query the nncp resources in the cluster
and see it listed with successful status.

```bash

> $kubectl get nncp

Reviewer 5: Issue of this style of "command line examples" is that you cannot triple-click the line to highlight and copy it and just paste it to terminal. There is also "Copy" button that cannot be used with this. Consider following:

```shell
kubectl get nncp`
```

```
NAME       STATUS
br0-eth1   SuccessfullyConfigured
```

  annotations:
    k8s.v1.cni.cncf.io/resourceName: bridge.network.kubevirt.io/br0
spec:
  config: >
    {
        "cniVersion": "0.3.1",
        "name": "br0-100-l2-config",
        "plugins": [{
            "type": "bridge",
            "bridge": "br0",
            "vlan": 100,
            "ipam": {}}]
    }
EOF
```

## Start a pair of VMIs on different nodes using the multus configuration to connect a secondary interfaces to br0

Now it's time to startup the VMIs running on different nodes so we can check external connectivity of
br0. They will also have a secondary NIC eth1 to connect to the other VM running at different node, so they go
over the br0 at nodes.

The following picture illustrate the cluster:

<!-- yaspeller ignore:start -->

{% graphviz %}
graph bridge {
node [shape=square, style=filled color=gold];
splines=line;
subgraph cluster_kubevirtci {
label = "kubevirtci cluster";
color = mediumseagreen;
style = filled;
nd_br1_kubevirtci [label = "br1"]
subgraph cluster_node01 {
label = "node01";
color = khaki4;
style=filled;
nd_br0_node01 [label = "br0"]
nd_eth1_node01 [label = "eth1"]
subgraph cluster_vmia {
label = "vmia";
style=filled;
color=lightcyan3;

> nd_eth1_vmia [label = "eth1"];

Reviewer 3: All interfaces in the graph are named  `eth1`. Sounds confusing.

Author: We have a eth1 at node and at eth1 at VMIs there is nothing we can do about it.

}

    }
    subgraph cluster_node02 {
      label = "node02";
      color = khaki4;
      style = filled;
      nd_br0_node02 [label = "br0"]
      nd_eth1_node02 [label = "eth1"]
      subgraph cluster_vmib {
        label = "vmib";
        style=filled;
        color=lightcyan3;
        nd_eth1_vmib [label = "eth1"];
      }

    }
    nd_eth1_node01 -- nd_br1_kubevirtci
    nd_eth1_node02 -- nd_br1_kubevirtci
    nd_br0_node01 -- nd_eth1_node01
    nd_br0_node01 -- nd_eth1_vmia
    nd_br0_node02 -- nd_eth1_node02
    nd_br0_node02 -- nd_eth1_vmib

}
}

> {% endgraphviz %}

Reviewer 3: Shouldn't this be correctly indented ? Half of it is wrong (I could even buy 'all wrong'... ).

Author: I think repo post-commit tooling if being too smart here.

<!-- yaspeller ignore:end -->

First step is to install the `virtctl` command line tool to play with virtual machines:

```bash
curl -L -o virtctl https://github.com/kubevirt/kubevirt/releases/download/v0.33.0/virtctl-v0.33.0-linux-amd64
chmod +x virtctl
sudo install virtctl /usr/local/bin
```

Now let's create two VirtualMachineInstances on each node they will have one secondary NIC connected to br0 using the multus configuration for vlan 100, also activate kubemacpool to be sure that mac addresses are unique in the cluster and install the qemu-guest-agent so ip addresses from secondary NICs are reported to VMI so we can inspect them later on.

> ```bash

Reviewer 5: Please set the syntax to yaml instead

      interfaces:
      - name: default
        bridge: {}
      - name: br0-100
        bridge: {}
    machine:
      type: ""
    resources:
      requests:
        memory: 1024M
  networks:
  - name: default
    pod: {}
  - name: br0-100
    multus:
      networkName: br0-100-l2
  terminationGracePeriodSeconds: 0
  volumes:
    - name: containerdisk
      containerDisk:
        image: kubevirt/fedora-cloud-container-disk-demo
    - name: cloudinitdisk
      cloudInitNoCloud:
        networkData: |
          version: 2
          ethernets:
            eth1:
              addresses: [ 10.200.0.2/24 ]
        userData: |-
          #!/bin/bash
          echo "fedora" |passwd fedora --stdin
          dnf -y install qemu-guest-agent
          sudo systemctl enable qemu-guest-agent
          sudo systemctl start qemu-guest-agent
EOF
```

Wait for the two VMIs to be ready.
Eventually you will see something like this:

```bash
$ kubectl get vmi
NAME      AGE    PHASE     IP               NODENAME
vmia      2m4s   Running   10.244.196.142   node01
vmib      2m4s   Running   10.244.140.86    node02
```

We can check that they have one secondary NIC without
address assigned:

> ```bash

Reviewer 5: Would you set highlighting to yaml? Since most of the snippet is yaml, it may be more readable.

    - 10.244.140.83/32
    - fe80::a4ec:1bff:fe89:3ede/64
    mac: a6:ec:1b:89:3e:de
    name: default
  - interfaceName: eth1
    ipAddress: 10.200.0.2/24
    ipAddresses:
    - 10.200.0.2/24
    - fe80::bcb9:95ff:fe48:880e/64
    mac: be:b9:95:48:88:0e
    name: br0-100
```

Let's finish this section by verifying connectivity between vmia and vmib using `ping`. Open the console of vmia virtual machine and use `ping` command with destination IP address 10.200.0.2, which is the address assigned to the secondary interface of vmib:

> note "Note"
> The user and password for this VMIs is `fedora`, it was configured at cloudinit userData

```bash
virtctl console vmia
$ ping 10.200.0.2 -c 3
PING 10.200.0.2 (10.200.0.2): 56 data bytes
64 bytes from 10.200.0.2: seq=0 ttl=50 time=357.040 ms
64 bytes from 10.200.0.2: seq=1 ttl=50 time=379.742 ms
64 bytes from 10.200.0.2: seq=2 ttl=50 time=404.066 ms

--- 10.200.0.2 ping statistics ---
3 packets transmitted, 3 packets received, 0% packet loss
round-trip min/avg/max = 357.040/380.282/404.066 ms
```

## Conclusion

At this blog post we used some network components from kubevirt project to communicate two VMs at different nodes

> through a linux bridge connected to a secondary NIC, this illustrate how VM traffic can be connected to a specific NIC

Reviewer 2: ... secondary NIC. This illustrate**s** ...

> at node using a secondary NIC.

Reviewer 2: **on a** node using a secondary node NIC.

---
layout: post
author: ellorent
tittle: Multiple Network Attachment with bridge CNI
description: This post do a follow up on multi network connectivity blog post but this time with bridge CNI instead of OVS, cluster-network-addons-operator to install all the kubevirt network operators and kubernetes-nmstate to configure the bridge at nodes.
navbar_active: Blogs
pub-date: September 23
pub-year: 2020
category: news
tags:
  [
    cnao,
    cluster-network-addons-operator,
    kubernetes-nmstate,
    nmstate,
    bridge,
    multus,
    networking,
    CNI,
    multiple networks,
  ]
comments: true
---

> # Introduction

Reviewer 5: Use second level titles ##. Now it uses the same style as the main title and it is slightly confusing (and titles are spanning multiple lines)

Author: Done

> At a previous [blog post]({% post_url 2018-09-12-attaching-to-multiple-networks %}) we described how to attach Virtual Machines to multiple interfaces connected to different networks using multus + ovs-cni and how multus make possible to have more than one network interface at pods.

Reviewer 5: I would not start the post by describing the (very very outdated) old one. You should sell that we will configure secondary network for VMs via Linux bridge. Deployment of all the components and configuration of host networking will be done through the API.

And as a note bellow it you can mention the old blog post, why it was problematic and why is it better now (no dependency and everything through the API).

Author: Done

This approach depends on running OVS at nodes that are spinning Virtual Machines, to remove that dependency the bridge CNI can be used, it will attach the pod secondary network to a specified Linux bridge at nodes, but will not create it, for that purpose [kubernetes-nmstate](https://github.com/nmstate/kubernetes-nmstate) will be used in the form of new [CRDs](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/extend-kubernetes/api-extension/custom-resources/).

Also at previous post all the needed network components were installed by hand applying their manifests, at this post we introduce [cluster-network-addons-operator](https://github.com/kubevirt/cluster-network-addons-operator) as the meta operator that will take care of network components lifecycle using the CR NetworkAddonsConfig as the interface.

# Introducing meta operator cluster-network-addons-operator

> This meta operator is a deviation of [cluster-network-operator](https://github.com/openshift/cluster-network-operator) covering kubevirt networking needs.

Reviewer 5: Again, this intro is interesting only for people that care about CNO or OpenShift. I'd start with the important part - it is an operator deploying components for advanced networking features (not only for) VM workloads.

In fact, I would not mention CNO at all since it is only for OpenShift.

Author: Done

> This meta operator is a deviation of [cluster-network-operator](https://github.com/openshift/cluster-network-operator) covering kubevirt networking needs.

Reviewer 5: Mention why having an operator is great - you do everything through the API and you don't have to go over all nodes to install these components yourself. It also assures smooth updates.

This is our chance to get some new users.

Author: Done

It install/update/delete different networking components with some tuning parameters specified by [NetworkAddonsConfig CR](https://github.com/kubevirt/cluster-network-addons-operator#configuration)

Also the progress is reflected at NetworkAddonsConfig status field, split per component.

> At this specific case the components that we are going to install are multus, linuxBridge and nmstate so the

Reviewer 5: linux bridge CNI.

And mention that you will explain all of them in detail later.

Author: Done

NetworkAddonsConfig will look like:

```yaml
apiVersion: networkaddonsoperator.network.kubevirt.io/v1
kind: NetworkAddonsConfig
metadata:
  name: cluster
spec:
  multus: {}
  linuxBridge: {}

>   nmstate: {}

Reviewer 5: Consider including KMP as well. Our chance to advertise it

Author: ditto

  imagePullPolicy: Always
```

> # Bridging pods and nodes with bridge CNI

Reviewer 5: "bridging" may not mean anything to regular users. "Connecting Pods, VMs and Nodes over a single network" may be better (but I'm not 100% sure about that either)

Author: Done

> As explained at previous blog is possible to add a secondary network interface to a pod using multus meta CNI and for that secondary interface is possible to specify what CNI to use, in this case we illustrate bridge CNI since it's the one that we are going to use to attach Virtual Machines.

Reviewer 5: Again, start with the interesting parts - why would you want to connect your components to a single L2 network if you already have the pod network. I don't want to think about the previous blogpost here.

Author: Done

For VirtualMachine networking what is desired is to use a L2 bridge at nodes (created by kubernetes-nmstate) with ports on node network interfaces and ports on pod's veth so communication over this secondary interface on pod can be directed to a specific network interface at Node.

> To do so a bridge is expected to be already created at Node since bridge CNI no longer creating it for you, to ensure that the configuration is applied only at pods on nodes that has the bridge the `k8s.v1.cni.cncf.io/resourceName` is added, this goes hand in hand with another component [bridge-marker](https://github.com/kubevirt/bridge-marker) that will inspect nodes networking and if a bridge pops up it will mark node status with it.

Reviewer 5: "no longer" would make sense only to people who remember it creating the bridge. Saying that the CNI only attaches to an existing bridge, and that's why you have to create it first, would be enough

Author: Done

This is an example of the results from bridge-marker on nodes:

```yaml
---
status:
  allocatable:
    bridge.network.kubevirt.io/testBridge: 1k
  capacity:
    bridge.network.kubevirt.io/testBridge: 1k
```

This is an example of NetworkAttachmentDefinition to create a L2 bridge

```yaml
apiVersion: k8s.cni.cncf.io/v1
kind: NetworkAttachmentDefinition
metadata:
  name: bridge-network
  annotations:
    k8s.v1.cni.cncf.io/resourceName: bridge.network.kubevirt.io/br0
spec:
  config: >
    {
        "cniVersion": "0.3.1"
        "name": "br0-l2",
        "plugins": [{
            "type": "bridge",
            "bridge": "br0",
            "ipam": {}
        }]
    }
```

After this adding bridge secondary network to a pod is a matter of adding the following annotation to
it:

```yaml
annotations:
  k8s.v1.cni.cncf.io/networks: br0-l2
```

# Messing up node networking with NodeNetworkConfigurationPolicy (aka nncp)

> Changing kubernetes cluster node networking can be done manually iterating over all the cluster nodes and making changes or using different automatization tools like ansible, but using just another kubernetes resource for that purpose

Reviewer: still valid

> Changing kubernetes cluster node networking can be done manually iterating over all the cluster nodes and making changes or using different automatization tools like ansible, but using just another kubernetes resource for that purpose

Reviewer: still valid

## Requirements

We are going to use a [kubevirtci](https://github.com/kubevirt/kubevirtci) as kubernetes cluster provider, to start it up, install NetworkManager >= 1.22 (needed for kubernetes-nmstate) and dnsmasq on it follow the following steps:

```bash
git clone https://kubevirt/kubevirtci
cd kubevirtci
make cluster-up
./cluster-up/ssh node01 -- sudo dnf install -y yum-plugin-copr
./cluster-up/ssh node01 -- sudo dnf copr enable -y networkmanager/NetworkManager-1.22
./cluster-up/ssh node01 -- sudo dnf install -y NetworkManager
./cluster-up/ssh node01 -- sudo systemctl daemon-reload
./cluster-up/ssh node01 -- sudo systemctl restart NetworkManager
./cluster-up/ssh node01 -- sudo dnf install -y dnsmasq
export KUBECONFIG=$(./cluster-up/kubeconfig.sh)
```

## Installing components

This will install kubevirt v0.33.0 using the kubevirt-operator

```bash
export KUBEVIRT_VERSION=v0.33.0
kubectl apply -f https://github.com/kubevirt/kubevirt/releases/download/${KUBEVIRT_VERSION}/kubevirt-operator.yaml

# Ensure the KubeVirt CRD is created
count=0

> until kubectl get crd kubevirts.kubevirt.io; do

Reviewer 5: I would vote to use single-line commands instead of writing scripts here. It is acceptable to ask the user to retry until it gets created - that's an easy human language, rather than having them read this bash magic

Author: Well people is going to copy paste stuff and also they may end up scripting stuff, is not bad that we do the proper stuff here.

    ((count++)) && ((count == 30)) && echo "KubeVirt CRD not found" && exit 1
    echo "waiting for KubeVirt CRD"
    sleep 1
done

kubectl apply -f https://github.com/kubevirt/kubevirt/releases/download/${KUBEVIRT_VERSION}/kubevirt-cr.yaml

# Ensure the KubeVirt CR is created
count=0

> until kubectl -n kubevirt get kv kubevirt; do

Reviewer 5: ditto

Author: Ditto

kubectl wait -n kubevirt kv kubevirt --for condition=Available --timeout 180s || (echo "KubeVirt not ready in time" && exit 1)
```

Next the meta operator cluster-network-addons-operator 0.42.0

```bash
export CNAO_VERSION=0.42.0
kubectl apply -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/kubevirt/cluster-network-addons-operator/master/manifests/cluster-network-addons/${CNAO_VERSION}/namespace.yaml
kubectl apply -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/kubevirt/cluster-network-addons-operator/master/manifests/cluster-network-addons/${CNAO_VERSION}/network-addons-config.crd.yaml
kubectl apply -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/kubevirt/cluster-network-addons-operator/master/manifests/cluster-network-addons/${CNAO_VERSION}/operator.yaml
kubectl wait deployment -n cluster-network-addons cluster-network-addons-operator --for condition=Available --timeout=200s
```

To install multus, linuxBridge and kubernetes-nmstate we dump the NetworkAddonsConfig and apply it

```bash
cat <<EOF | kubectl apply -f -
apiVersion: networkaddonsoperator.network.kubevirt.io/v1
kind: NetworkAddonsConfig
metadata:
  name: cluster
spec:
  multus: {}
  linuxBridge: {}
  nmstate: {}
  imagePullPolicy: Always
EOF
```

> Wait for all the components to be deployed and ready

Reviewer 5: Please add : after each sentence describing a following code block

Author: ditto

```yaml
status:
  allocatable:
    bridge.network.kubevirt.io/br0: 1k
  capacity:
    bridge.network.kubevirt.io/br0: 1k
```

Also inspecting the node with `ip` command will show us the linux bridge br0

```bash
$./cluster-up/ssh.sh node01 -- ip a show br0
24: br0: <BROADCAST,MULTICAST,UP,LOWER_UP> mtu 1500 qdisc noqueue state UP group default qlen 1000
    link/ether 52:55:00:d1:56:00 brd ff:ff:ff:ff:ff:ff
```

At this point we have ready L2 linux bridge connected to NIC veth1

## Configure multus to use br0 as secondary NIC at Pods with proper annotation

Apply a NetworkAttachmentDefinition for bridge CNI as the secondary NIC using the L2 br0 linux bridge

```bash
cat <<EOF | kubectl apply -f -
apiVersion: k8s.cni.cncf.io/v1
kind: NetworkAttachmentDefinition
metadata:
  name: br0-l2
  annotations:
    k8s.v1.cni.cncf.io/resourceName: bridge.network.kubevirt.io/br0
spec:
  config: >
    {
        "cniVersion": "0.3.1",
        "name": "br0-l2-conf",
        "plugins": [{
            "type": "bridge",
            "bridge": "br0",
            "ipam": {}
        }]
    }
EOF
```

Now just for the shake of it let's just create a dummy pod with proper annotation so we can check

> that secondary NIC is created, it's using a container image that contains dhclient already.

Reviewer: `dhclient`-->`dhcpClient`

2: eth0: <BROADCAST,MULTICAST,UP,LOWER_UP> mtu 1440 qdisc pfifo_fast qlen 1000
    link/ether 8a:55:87:43:29:d0 brd ff:ff:ff:ff:ff:ff
    inet 10.244.196.150/32 brd 10.255.255.255 scope global eth0
       valid_lft forever preferred_lft forever
    inet6 fe80::8855:87ff:fe43:29d0/64 scope link
       valid_lft forever preferred_lft forever
3: eth1: <BROADCAST,MULTICAST> mtu 1500 qdisc noop qlen 1000
    link/ether 1a:af:04:3d:d9:7f brd ff:ff:ff:ff:ff:ff
```

So we have `eth0` that's default pod network and then we have eth1 which is
the NIC connected to br0 at node, now let's run DHCP client on it so
it retrieves at ip address

```bash
$ sudo udhcpc -i eth1 -s /sbin/cirros-dhcpc
udhcpc (v1.23.2) started
Sending discover...
Sending select for 192.168.10.13...
Lease of 192.168.10.13 obtained, lease time 3600
$ ip a show dev eth1
3: eth1: <BROADCAST,MULTICAST,UP,LOWER_UP> mtu 1500 qdisc pfifo_fast qlen 1000
    link/ether 1a:af:04:3d:d9:7f brd ff:ff:ff:ff:ff:ff
    inet 192.168.10.13/24 brd 192.168.10.255 scope global eth1
       valid_lft forever preferred_lft forever
    inet6 fe80::18af:4ff:fe3d:d97f/64 scope link
       valid_lft forever preferred_lft forever

> $

Reviewer: this is colored red from some reason in the output, perhaps you could remove it if it's not necessary?
